# Evolutionary Technology: Replication of the FATINT system

This repository houses two implementations of the FATINT model, with the goal of
replications the results found in the paper
[_"Evolutionary Technology and Phenotype Plasticity: The FATINT System"_](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228353897_Evolutionary_Technology_and_Phenotype_Plasticity_The_FATINT_System)
by George Kampis and Gulyás László.

The NetLogo implementation found in `fatint-netlogo` offers
an intuitive Graphical User Interface to interact with the model, while the C++
implementation found in `fatint-cpp` is a command-line tool to run parameter
sweeps quickly and efficiently.

The user manuals for both can be found in the thesis accompanying this
repository, the source of which can be found in `thesis`.

The compiled thesis can be found in the root of the repository

## Building the thesis from source

The thesis is written in the [Typst typesetting language](https://typst.app),
and the UML diagrams contained within are made with
[PlantUML](https://plantuml.com).

Follow the installation instructions relevant to your operating system on each
website.

### Building the diagrams

The repository comes with all PlantUML diagrams prebuilt in SVG format, but if
you modify any `.puml` source file, you will have to recompile them.

To do so, open a command line in the `thesis/assets/diagrams` directory, and
issue the following command:

```bash
thesis/assets/diagrams$ plantuml --svg '*.puml'
```

This will rebuild all diagrams.

### Building the thesis

Open a command line in the root of the project, and issue the following
command:

```bash
$ typst compile --root thesis thesis/main.typ thesis.pdf
```

### Regenerating measurements

The repo comes with all datapoints used in the thesis. If you want to compile
the thesis with your own data, you can use the `run-simulations.sh` script to
run all experiments outlined in the thesis.

The script requires NetLogo 6.4.0, the `fatint` program and the C++ performance
tests to be available on your `PATH`.

Follow the instructions in the thesis to install NetLogo 6.4.0 and make sure to
add its directory to your `PATH`:

```bash
$ export PATH=$PATH:/wherever/you/put/NetLogo-6.4.0-64
```

The latest [release](https://github.com/hamrik/fatint-thesis/releases) contains
a ZIP file of the repository with a prebuilt `fatint` program in its root and
test programs in `fatint-cpp-tests`.

If you use the relase build, make sure the add the repository to your `PATH`:

```bash
$ export PATH=$PATH:$PWD:$PWD/fatint-cpp-tests
```

If you build the program from source then follow the instructions in the thesis.
On Ubuntu 24.04 the process looks like this:

```bash
$ sudo apt install build-essential cmake libtbb12 libtbb-dev
$ cmake -S fatint-cpp -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
$ cmake --build build --parallel --config Release
$ export PATH=$PATH:$PWD/build:$PWD/build/libs/libfatint/tests
```

Finally you can launch the helper script:

```bash
$ ./run-simulations.sh
```

You can pass `netlogo` or `libfatint` as argument to the script if you only
want to run experiments in one or the other implementation.

```bash
$ ./run-simulations.sh libfatint
```

The resulting tables will be exported to `thesis/data`, ready to be ingested by
Typst.

```bash
$ typst compile --root thesis thesis/main.typ thesis.pdf
```

## AI usage disclaimer

The initial versions of:
 - The Typst template that matches the semi-official
   [ELTE FI thesis template for LaTeX](https://github.com/mcserep/elteikthesis)
 - Some unit tests, particularly those concerning model formulas

were initially generated by Claude Sonnet 4.6 and Google Gemini respectively.

All AI content was manually reviewed and then modified by hand.
